Daily report on the status of the Turrialba (Irazú, Poás, Tenorio, Miravalles) and Rincón de la Vieja volcanoes for the last 24 hours 
updated on January 10, 2018

Volcán Turrialba

Turrialba volcanic seismic activity recorded by seismographs continues at a relatively low level, 
with discrete LP-type earthquakes and very short amplitude volcanic tremor  bands associated with 
the movement of fluids (water, gases, and / or magma) through cracks and cavities inside the volcanic building. 
The West Crater continues to present bright light due to the presence of magmatic gases and rocks at 
high temperatures (at least between 500 and 600 ° C).

Between January 7 and 9, 2018, very very fine ash emissions (PM1 and PM2.5) were observed in the West Crater 
in an almost continuous and passive manner in relatively low quantities. The very fine ash was observed through the webcam, 
through the signals recorded by the Doppler radar used by the OVSICORI-UNA to remotely monitor the emission of ash 
from Turrialba, and through the Station's fine volcanic aerosol laser sensors. of Volcanic Gases and Aerosols of the OVSICORI-UNA located in Coronado-San José.
Emissions cease from 2 am on the 9th to reappear with much less intensity, and for a short time, on the night of the 9th. 
Today the volcano wakes up with only passive degassing. Inhabitants around the Turrialba volcano have reported between January 8 and 9,
small amount of ash falls in Cartago (Finca La Central, Los Quemados, El Tapojo, La Pastora), 
San José (Cascajal de Coronado, Tres Ríos, Curridabat, Sabanilla, San Pedro Montes de Oca, Pavas and Escazú). 
Smell of sulfur has been perceived in San José (Ipís de Goicoechea and Sabanilla Montes de Oca). On January 2 and 3, 2018, 
residents of La Pastora de Turrialba and in the vicinity of the Irazú volcano reported a slight fall of ash and the smell of sulfur.
The plume of water vapor, gases and fine particles and ash emitted by the Turrialba remained with a moderate flow and 
the height fluctuates between 500 and 1000 m above the top of the volcano. 
The plume was dispersed by the prevailing winds towards the southwest -sur, according to the 
National Meteorological Institute (IMN) and the dispersion map of materials emitted by the volcano
generated with the computational code AERMOD View (Environmental Observatory UNA) (Figs. 1 and 2).


Emissions could affect areas such as Cartago (Turrialba Volcano National Park, 
Irazú Volcano National Park, Finca La Central, Finca Quemados, Tajo, La Pastora, Paraiso, 
Cot, Tierra Blanca, Llano Grande, Chicuá, San Rafael de Oreamuno, Cipreses, Pacayas , Cachi, 
Orosi, Cervantes, Capellades, Raicero, Turrialba, Pejibaye). During today, January 10, 
the plume appears white, rich in water vapor and without ash, with a height that does not exceed 500 m above the top of the volcano. 
The dispersion of the Turrialba plume by the prevailing winds is currently towards the region located southwest of the volcano.
Detection of fine volcanic aerosols suspended in the atmospheric air of Coronado-San José Volcanic Gas and Aerosol Monitoring Station.
Between January 8 and 9, 2018, an extreme increase was observed in the concentration of very fine aerosols (PM10, PM2.5 and PM1) 
in the atmospheric air in Coronado-San José attributed to the. Very fine ash emissions from the Turrialba volcano during those 
two days according to the distribution rose of the winds as a function of the aerosol concentration ranges that 
indicate the Turrialba volcano as the main source of fine aerosol emission (Fig. 3). 
Overall, hourly average aerosol concentrations increased by up to 2 orders of magnitude in the last 2 days just past (Fig. 3). 
The SO2 gas did not show unusual increase, so it is suggested that the marked increase in the concentration of very fine aerosols seems to be a result
removal of ash and very fine loose rocky material deposited at the bottom of the West Crater by vigorous fumaroles. 
According to the Air Quality Regulation for Pollutants Criterion for Costa Rica (Decree 39951), 
the norm for maximum immission of PM2.5 is an average of 35 ug / m3 for a period of 24 hours.

In the particular case of January 8 and 9, 2018, the daily average concentration of PM2.5 aerosols was 152 and 156 ug / m3, respectively. 
In terms of percentiles, 95% of the PM2.5 aerosol concentration data recorded by the Volcanic Aerosol and Gas Monitoring Station on January 8 and 9, 
exceeded 60 ug / m3, while 95% of the PM1 aerosol concentrations were above 44 ug / m3. 
These concentrations of PM2.5 in those two days are critical from the point of view of human, animal and plant health.
For healthy people and animals, very sensitive or with respiratory or cardiovascular problems, 
even short periods of exposure to high concentrations of fine particles PM2.5 could be compromising for their health. 
From 4:00 pm on January 9 to the present day, the concentration of fine aerosols in the atmospheric air in Coronado 
has remained at levels closer to normal during periods of very low or no ash emissions in Turrialba ( Fig. 3).


Irazú volcano and other volcanoes: Triggered tectonic seismicity after the earthquake in Honduras of January 9, 2018 
at 20:51 of magnitude Mw 7.6

Dozens of tectonic earthquakes have been recorded by the OVSICORI-UNA seismograph network in the vicinity of the Tenorio 
and Irazú volcanoes, and to a lesser number in Miravalles. 
These events, generated mainly by geological faults distributed around the volcanic massifs, 
have presented magnitudes that vary between ML = 2.0 and ML = 4.3 (ML = local magnitude). 
It is interesting to note that the seismicity observed around the Tenorio and Miravalles volcanoes 
began around 5 minutes after the occurrence of an earthquake of magnitude Mw = 7.6, at 20:51:40, local time, on January 9, 2018 in Honduras , 
with an epicenter in the Caribbean Sea of Honduras, 44 km east of Swan Island (Figure 7) 

Tectonic seismicity in the form of swarms has been recorded between the Rincón de la Vieja, Miravalles and Tenorio volcanoes 
in the months and years prior to the earthquake in Honduras on January 9. On the contrary, in the
Irazú volcano, for a period of several months, no seismic swarms had been recorded until about 3 hours after the aforementioned earthquake in Honduras.

